Well, good afternoon.
Welcome to the Committee Selection Committee.
Um, so thank you for talking to us this afternoon.
What I'd ask is if you could introduce yourselves, uh,
to the committee and those watching online,
and, uh, then ask you to, uh, you know,
make an opening, um, statement.
And then from there we'll move to questions from Emmas.
Great. Thank you. Lieutenant Coto car.
Thank you Chair, and good afternoon everyone.
Uh, so I'm Jason Delamore.
I'm the Chief executive of, uh, the Laies Commission,
which I'll call Lotto New Zealand.
Uh, and with me, I've got chair by board Mark Todd next
to me, Jeff Haywood, our Chief Financial Officer,
and Will Hein, our head of corporate comms.
So, good afternoon to you all.
Uh, so thanks for the opportunity to appear before you.
As part of Lottos annual Review, we take our accountability
to New Zealand as a
and Parliament Extreme extremely seriously.
Although Lotto does not receive taxpayer money,
we are a Crown entity with a statutory monopoly.
And the revenue we generate
through Lawrie Games is ultimately public money
that supports literally thousands
of community organizations.
We see this, this review as an opportunity to demonstrate
how responsibly and transparently we
have delivered on our mandate.
So Lotto is a bit of history.
Lotto was established back in 1987 under the Gambling Act,
and we exist to provide safe games that allow New Zealanders
to play and win while contributing money back
to Kiwi communities.
Through the Lotto Grants board.
In the past 38 years,
we have returned more than $6.7 billion back to communities.
The Lotto Grants board is an independent government entity,
and, and Lotto has no input into where
that funding should be allocated.
We aim to provide these strong,
sustainable community returns while continually
strengthening the safety of our products to reduce risks
around problem gambling and underage gambling.
Everything we do is shaped by balancing these two things.
The last time Lotto appeared in person
before the committee was two years ago.
Since then, we have reported two record financial results.
We returned $434 million to the lot of grant board in FY 24
and $395 million in the past financial year,
benefiting thousands of organizations.
I'm proud that we've done so well, keeping reports
of gambling harm stable under our target
of one person per 10,000 customers.
In fact, on a per capita basis, gambling harm reports
to the Ministry of Health related
to Lotto have actually halved since 2017.
Under our strategy to 2029, we are aiming
to return $412 million in annual profits
to the lottery grants board.
To do that, we've set a pathway for us
to boldly transform our customer experience.
A major step forward in this regard happened in September
with a successful delivery of our Edge project.
This involved replacing our core and online gaming system
and updating the physical hardware in more than 1100
stores across the country.
Uh, this project was completed on time
and within Budget Edge,
and the projects that will follow are very important.
It's crucial that we remain able
to provide a modern lottery products safely
and responsibly, given the rapidly changing
competitive environment that we're in.
And this includes the forthcoming licensing
of online casinos within New Zealand.
Part of our statutory role is
to advise the government on lotteries,
and we've actively, actively engaged in this capacity in the
past 12 months, noting the direction of the government
around fiscal discipline.
We are proud to have strict cost controls in place
and close the year, 10.2% below our budget.
One of the things I'm most pleased about is our strong
and engaged workforce, especially being able to say that
that's having just delivered a project
that requires significant
and sustained effort from the whole team
across the organization.
Lastly, we're also very proud
to be ranked number five on Kattar's Corporate Reputation
Index in 2025, and that reflects our strong brand trust
and connection to New Zealanders,
and that improved from 12th place two years ago.
So you have our responses to the annual review, uh,
questions as well as our annual report
and corporate planning documents, and we're welcome.
Any questions you may have.
Thank you very much. Yeah. First Scott, thank you.
Um, I appreciate you support Kiwis to play and win,
but possibly use encourage Kiwis to play
and lose more regularly.
Would that be accurate?
Uh, in terms of the odds? Yes. Yes. Thank you.
Um, but we are quite proud that, uh, it's all,
it's all about lots of Kiwis just contributing a little bit.
So our average ticket sales
around $20 to put it into context.
So, um, your, um, annual report states
that harm minimization is central to everything we do.
How much was spent by Lotto New Zealand in 20 24, 25
on harm minimization and harm minimization clause? I
Don't have a number off the top of my head, Jeff,
but we can talk about some of the things we do, but yeah,
That's sort of embedded. So
everyone at Lottos trained in harm, you know,
so we all attend the training.
We have a dedicated harm team, um, so we could separate
that out for you, but there's lots
of activities, uh, that we do.
So mystery shopping that comes at a cost to make sure
that retailers are updated.
Um, adhering to the harm guidelines,
but I can come back to you with exact numbers on the whole,
But we have a dedicated harm team.
A lot of our advertising is all
around harmonization activity.
A lot of our collateral, uh,
that goes out to stores as well.
So it's a significant part of what we do.
Okay. I'd certainly appreciate that
because given that this is central to what your purpose is,
um, I would've thought that this was something that you'd,
you would've put in your, um, in your response to us
or you'd, you'd have have ready for us.
Um, so I guess
possibly you don't know this, but
how much does the spend on harm minimization
differ from a previous period, um,
previous reporting periods?
Uh, do you know, do
or is it, is it just one of the things you do
The spend or, yeah, so we keep an eye on the outcomes
and as I was saying before, the amount of, um,
harm presentations over time has dropped.
Um, so in terms of outcome, that's a, that's a good result.
But as Jeff looks at the numbers,
we'll we'll have a look at it over,
over the periods. Yeah, and
I think if I, if I take a board perspective for
that question, that the context of oversight of, uh,
strategic direction harm minimization is woven
into that consideration.
Some of the key areas that,
that we've initiated over the years
that I've seen on the board, such as reduction in the number
of retail retail store offerings in low decile areas have
been integral to that, um, approach.
So it's an every year when you are doing your business
planning and budgeting, um, um, minimization is a check
that is a genuine headline item
to actually consider in that regard.
And just one, so you've talked about, um,
meeting the target of, um,
one in 10,000 players harm minimization,
but there's a, there's a, a data gap,
almost 5% data gap.
So how, how confident are you that you've actually met
that, that target?
Because it's not, there's, there's some gaps in the data.
There's a small gap from the Ministry of Health data,
so we are working with them to try
and look at how they bridge that gap, uh, moving forward.
But it's definitely something worth that. We,
And the, and the gap and the measure has been a consistent
measure over a number of years.
So the small periods of data gap probably, uh,
something we could say that don't cause us great
angst in the context of the
long-term performance over years.
New question Mau. Um, thanks very much.
Um, my question relates to cybersecurity.
So, um, h how confident are you
that the system is secure both externally and internally?
What kind of safeguards have you employed to
ensure that integrity?
Sure. That answer could take a very long time that we, I
we've invested, so our digital channel
is very important to us.
Uh, and we've got a very mature cybersecurity framework
that sits, uh, around that.
And we've increased our, um, investment in that over time.
Uh, so there's all sorts of preemptive, um,
controls in place and detecting security issues.
We've also got contracts with, um, third party experts
that help us, uh, in the, uh,
if an event did happen as well.
And we are constantly doing exercises around cybersecurity.
Sure. So you, um, it's up to that.
So, um, we, I understand there's 52%
of the sales are digital now.
Uh, no, that's retail. 48% digital.
48% is digital. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, which is quite a high percentage.
So, so you're absolutely confident the whole system is
secure and I'm just aware that there's some
very smart cookies out there.
Yeah. Um, figuratively and literally speaking. Yeah.
And um, you know, the, the kind of, um, infiltration
that could happen could be quite devastating. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. So we have sophisticated monitoring looking at the
system and specialist people, uh, within staff
and as I was saying, contracting
with real specialist third parties, uh, as well. Okay,
Thank You. Your
Question, Lamar?
Uh, thank you Mr. Chair.
I've, it's possibly, uh, a couple of subsets that sort
of related to the early primary.
Um, my question relates to
and think for the report that I've read, uh,
my question relates to your system, uh, where you've said,
uh, 48% is picking up from the previous question digital.
Um, what, what I would want to ask is with, uh, your work
with Ministry of Health problem gamblers.
So what, uh, tools are in place in terms of picking up
through the system problem gamblers
and what steps are in place?
'cause that's not anywhere here. It's quite an over.
Sure. So, and we've got a, um, a program,
fulsome program work that looks at prevention,
detection and intervention.
Yeah. So as people come
and people might self-report to us through the call center.
So we've got mechanisms through that system to, um,
capture folks and put 'em in touch with experts, uh, there
and people can come in through the website, uh, as well.
And that's on top of the Ministry of Health Stats.
And so with that, with a lot of operations, uh,
with different businesses moving online, uh,
and then you've quoted a figure, I think it was 48%.
Do you see in terms of the forecast of that, some
of those things will go online,
there'll be a bigger percentage in people,
maybe more at risk,
So more people going
to the digital channel? Is that the question? Yeah. Just
To picture some of your products.
Yes. Because it's moving to an online world Yes.
Which could be a younger demographic. Yes.
So what is in place in terms of the sort of forecast of your
Operation? Yes. So we've got some
sophisticated tools, uh,
that we roll out in turn that look at changes in,
um, digital behavior.
So if someone change, and this is what you need to look at,
is the, um, change in behavior is normally an indicator.
So if someone plays more often
or they deposit, um, money in smaller, faster amounts
and things like that, the system can detect that.
That's the detection part. And then we've got intervention.
So it will go through to someone to send out an email
or a call to intervene.
And what you typically see is very high rates
of people changing their behavior
positively after that happens. Such
A quick, just quickly, um, so would that system that, uh,
you are confident will pick up things like problem
gamblers and is it sort of
Related? Yeah, from a behavioral
perspective, yeah.
So it's an AI tool that, that learns over time
and so constantly be changing
and updating as new, new people come onto the system.
Okay. And sorry, last, last,
is there a self-exclusion sort of program that Yes.
Yes, there is. Yep. And sorry, just
to answer your question too, we have our cybersecurity
audited by th third parties as well.
That gives us a higher degree of confidence. Oh, fabulous.
Yeah. Some, some, um, global systems
that audit us on cybersecurity side. So Scott,
Yeah, so it's really good to hear that you've sort of,
you're monitoring, you're able to intervene at people.
But, um, the Ministry of Health data
I understand is people self-reporting
or seeking out help for problem, problem gambling.
Are you doing any other more proactive work
to look into problem gambling people in difficulty?
Is there any other way you are doing it
independent research?
Yes. That's, that's looking at
It, that's the prevention part of prevention,
detection and intervention.
So we, we do an awful lot at the beginning in terms
of educating people, making, um,
we have a thing called the Place Mark program of work.
So we put things out both into retail
and digital to help people think about
what does responsible gambling look like.
Um, you know, spend a little, um,
we put out the odds we have
that translated into different languages.
We work with specialty groups, um, with other Maori,
Pacifica and Asian, um, communities as well to try
and educate those groups.
Um, but I'm, I'm,
I'm really interested in whether you are, you've got any way
of checking to see if there's a bigger cohort of people
who have problem gambling other than those who self-report,
Uh, through that detection tool that I talked about
before that would give that to you
through the digital channel, and then feedback from the
retailers, uh, for the retail channel.
Yeah, and also just to keep in mind two aspects too to
that, which is we have very low spend limits
and we don't make a platforms available through late night
and hours of the morning when many people
who would actually be problem gaming,
people would actually be ga would actually be gaming.
So we effectively got a very strong attitude
of prevention in the first place.
So your question is to detection, we'd like to think
of a significant degree was actually dealt
with by prevention first
Stop everyone.
What's a harm team? What makes up your harm team?
So we have a group of folks who, um,
are within the business
and they're constantly looking at,
um, advertising that we put out there.
So they'll, they'll review that for harm messaging and
Credential. These people
are, they like the qualified credential
and they, uh, and they carry no bias?
No. Oh,
Really? Wow. Okay.
We are very impressed with our, um, um, team
and they hold us to account all day every day.
So, but they, they are evaluating all the collateral
that goes out the door, advertising game design.
Uh, we have other sophisticated tools around the world,
around the world as well that look at game design
and give you a score of that game around risk.
And all of ours are either lowest medium, we have nothing
that's in the high risk category, um,
because we're a responsible government owned entity.
So it does not behoove us to get into the risky part of,
So does the design, uh, understand the cultural context,
uh, in so with Maori families, um,
but not only just, just whanau, you know,
and you've named different, um, groups in your report,
does the design know that, understand that.
Um, and then when you said ai, I thought, hmm,
see that's another thing.
So yeah, just, just does your design, do you have the people
that it takes to understand those components
and come up with the right design that is actually about
how minimization and it can apply that? Yes.
So, uh, short answer is yes,
and we are always trying to improve in that particular area.
So as I was saying, we do work with different Maori
and Pacifica groups, uh,
and have just started working with different, um, Asian,
Asian family services as an example as well, to try
and tap into those groups to get a better understanding.
So we have stakeholder sessions, we go out into communities,
um, listen to people with lived experiences.
So we try to be as informed as we, as we possibly can.
New question, David.
Um, yes, you mentioned government agency,
you're on the asset side of our ledger.
Um, I'm interested in your response,
and I think it was question 13, where you're looking forward
to strategically you're responding to, uh,
move towards digital transactions
and evolving competitive environment.
That's actually what I'm asking about,
including forthcoming licensing
of online casinos in New Zealand.
So things are changing, things are moving,
so, you know, one of our assets.
What are you gonna do to ensure that you remain that?
Uh, it's not for us to make the call,
I'm gonna remain an asset or not.
It's up to us to make sure we are competitive
in a, in a new marketplace.
So, so our investments, I talked about
that core gaming system.
So that gives us a modern core gaming system
that we can operate in.
And then our next set of projects, uh,
what we call Project Frontier is
around our web and app front end.
So really deep improvements on the
customer experience side on digital.
So I've got no doubt once we get through that program, we,
we, we, we are a world class lottery provider now.
We'll be even more world class in the digital footprint
after we implement those.
Okay. So you would see
that you would maintain market share?
Yeah. So, so good question.
When you look at impacts of online casinos, uh,
and other jurisdictions around the world,
new Zealand's actually one of the last to, to do this.
So core lottery businesses tend to stay relatively stable.
Some lotteries and every lottery is different
around the world, but some of those lotteries
that have got involved in sports betting
or their own version of online casinos, they're the ones
that face, um,
the biggest impact when online casinos were
regulated. But we don't have that.
And, and just to add to that, 85%
of the business is based on the,
on the lotto suite of product.
The rest of it, the part product will be the part
of the business that does under pressure undoubted.
So our instant games and keynote are the areas
that would be in the more competitive
challenge. Yeah, yeah.
I got a supplementary on that actually.
'cause if you look at the year in review, I think you said
before that, uh, the last two years have been record years.
Uh, so that's despite the competitive environment where,
you know, increasingly people online
and they, uh, you know, they can buy products globally.
Uh, so notwithstanding you have had record year,
which seemed to indicate that you're
doing pretty well in a pretty competitive environment.
Yeah, we're doing, we're doing pretty well,
but a record year at Lotto is often dictated by the, um,
the jackpot, um, run that we have.
And we've had the fortune of the last couple years having
some big must be ones and and large jackpots.
And again, we've got, um, a proposal in front
of government now for enhancing of our Powerball game
and our five year strategy is
around getting the right technology in place
and the right shape of the game so that when, when we get
to about 2029, we want around 400 odd million,
$415 million reliably to be delivered to government
and not as dependent on the large jackpot swings
that we've seen in the last couple of years. So, so what
Do you see as the, um, competitive horizon?
What do, what do you see as the biggest risk factors?
Um, uh, well the first one is making sure we get the
legislative and regulatory settings right
and preserving lottos, um, play area,
particularly in the, in the core gaming.
So that's really essential, uh, for us.
And then investing in the Powerball changes that we've got
for government now, we'll take care
of implementing the right systems to be, to be there
and then we, we think we match fit, um, move forward.
Um, any question?
Yes. Great. Um, of the 395 million that was, uh,
transferred to Tu Ground Sport,
you might not, or you might know this.
Do you know what um, uh, what the figure is
or figures awarded to Kapa Maori organizations,
Maori led projects, do you
Know? No, unfortunately
we don't get that information so
that Lotto Grants board would've that
Totally separate. Yeah.
Thank you. Thanks Chair.
Um, I just wanna go back to uh, in the report
that we received in terms of the competitiveness of BLO
and you've sort of mentioned elements of it.
So going forward, um, this has been in for a number
of decades, like going on four decades,
so it's probably quite a safe system.
You've built it up,
you're gonna be competing against the online casinos in the
feature that they bring in.
'cause there's a lot that we don't know.
There's some things we know,
there's some things we don't know just in terms
of advertising.
So when that sort of system comes in, um, do you think
sort of what, what are your concerns
around the competitiveness
and will you still be able to compete given
that you've got quite some cost easy, you know, it's not,
you're not spending big money, it's on your small
Products. Yeah. So
let me address that in a couple other way.
Lemme talk about product
and then I'll talk about brand if you, if you like.
So product wise, part of the benefits
of the new gaming system is we, um,
have a thing called the content hub.
So that allows us to select games that are already made from
around the world, bring them into New Zealand, customize 'em
as necessary and bring them to market very quickly.
We didn't, we never had that capability with the old system.
So now we, we can tap into a global set of products, um,
that we can bring to market to the earlier questions.
They have all sorts of harm minimization criteria over them
as well, um, before we would put them out there into market.
So that's the, so that's why we've got
confidence around the product side.
On the brand side,
the investments we're making in Frontier will give us much
better customer experience that would be able to compete
with the online cas
'cause they're professional, um, in this area.
And what we don't want to give, want
to give up is our special place in the hearts
of New Zealanders pe people love the lotto brand
and what it does to communities
and we look forward to continuing that allocation
of funds back into the community.
'cause they won't be able to compete with that.
And we'll be known as, we'll be known
as a very safe player around the world.
But that's, that's part
of our strength preserve that going forward.
Put putting aside, um, the sort of COVID era and,
and the growth you saw
and probably the use of people using digital platform during
that period, what, what have you been seeing since then
terms of, you know, you've got 1,140
stores I think across the country.
We, we, your products are sold
and then you have the digital space.
Have you been seeing an incremental change?
Yeah, so it's, um, it's a good question.
Peaked, um, through COVID and then it dropped back
and we sort of see two to 3% a year increase in the,
in the digital uptake.
Um, and that'll, that'll continue
and get another boost when Project Frontier
that I talked about comes, comes to market.
However, it's a very strong retail network out there.
And when you talk to customers, um, they love going
and buying the the yellow ticket.
So we don't wanna give up.
Yeah, we don't wanna give up that local
connection that people have.
And one of the areas that we were working with a lot
of grant sport is
how do we tell those stories better at the community level?
'cause all that funding, all that profit literally goes into
local schools, sports field and things like that.
And the retailers wanna be able to tell
that connection story with that, with that grant funding.
Okay. How are you looking at doing that? We just
In more, I'm looking at over here, it's just keeping
that dialogue going, um, and telling the story better.
So we've just rolled out, we've just been working
with our lot of grant board.
We've just rolled out another half dozen new adverts from
around the country that look at little libraries
and, um, canoe outfits
and water sports and things like that.
And what we can, what
where we can come party is we've got a national
customer base and a
and channels that we can tell those stories.
So that's what, that's what we are trying to do.
I was saying there's 1,140 stores they're looking at
trying to localize those stories
To Those in the Community.
Yeah. So connecting,
um, I'm going a bit off piece here.
Connecting where that funding ultimately goes
with the local retailers
and how that's bolstering the local community.
Ne never underestimate the, the, the, the build
of the brand over all the decades.
Now being able to be used in that regard to connect
with the community, um, that's, that's a,
that's a relatively unique position that LA has
and you won't necessarily see
that in jurisdictions internationally. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. Thank you. Through the chair.
So I think you've probably already had some elements,
but will you be able to con um,
continue the sophistication
of lotto versus online casino gambling bill?
Oh, we are improving it significantly
with the investments that we are making.
Yeah. So we'll have world leading technology, uh,
across the board, both the core gaming system
and then the front end that is interacting
with the customers and the level
of knowledge that we'll have about, with,
With, with one one provides on a social sense.
There's, there's elements
of the word sophistication in the context of, um,
digital gaming that we
don't actually want to be anywhere near.
So that, that's the, that's the definite definition,
that's the definite, um, d difference between
and many of the players you might see in the future.
Yeah, the way those games are designed
and sorts of tools they use
to bring people in is completely different from
what we, we do what we do
Well, well just through the chair.
I just think that because our younger audiences are digital
natives, whereas their parents
and grandparents are still people that walk into the store
and buy a product like lotto product, whatever that may be.
Mm. And it's still probably cheaper than some
of those online things.
Um, so I think you, it just seems to be
that your sophistication will be part of that audience
that attracts audiences around al
or with a physical thing rather than a WAN thing.
Yeah. I, I might just take the opportunity.
Um, just in terms of your cost structure, um,
are you seeing any changes over the last couple years as, as
that is that move, you know, 48% going digital, um,
bringing in, you know, a new platform?
Uh, is there, is there a notable change
in overall cost structure? Jeff,
Jeff On this one there are subtle changes.
So obviously with the Edge project, that was a big year
for us in investing, but um,
the model is shifting a little bit from retails,
which are agents and take a percentage to much more, um,
fixed technology investment including cyber.
Um, and so that's probably a little bit
of a structural shift that we are seeing in overseas
Modies are seeing as well.
Um, does that put pressure on your retail outlets then?
You know, because they're losing sales over the counter.
So have you had any feedback or pushback about that?
Uh, well at the moment retail sales have
remained pretty stable while mine's been growing.
Um, and certainly, um,
In addition, so it's additional transactions that yeah.
Oh, I see. Mm-hmm.
So it's not one at the expense of another?
No, as Jason was saying, it's more sort of okay, you know,
that the future is around Omni, where you can do digital
and be recognized in store, but still play
and have a physical ticket.
Yep. Um, so there's a little bit of a blurring of
that strict digital retail as we move forward.
Great.
Excellent. I, um, thank you very much
for appearing from the, uh, social.
Thank you. Thank, thank
You. Thank you all very
Much. Thank.